 What is Computer Science? | Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD Skip to main content University of Maryland Undergraduate Computer Science at UMD Toggle navigation Home About Academic Advisors Heads of Staff Graduate Assistants Peer Advisors Current Students Academic Advising Academic Integrity Academic and Personal Resources Advising Updates Class Web Pages Clubs and Organizations Computer Science Honors Computer Science Minor Degree Requirements Departmental Exception to Policy Request For Parents of Students Independent Study Internal Transfer Applicants Internships, Co-ops, Employment Major/Non-Major Permissions Professorial Faculty Report a Concern or Incident Scholarships Study Abroad Undergraduate Research Teaching Assistants Tutoring Resources What 4XX Should I Take?! Prospective Applicants External Transfer Applicants External New Student Exemption Exams First Year Applicants CS LEP FAQ (Effective Fall 2024) Info for Prospective Partners Immersive Media Design Major Other Computing Majors at UMD Post-Bacc Applicants FAQ Combined BS/MS Program What is Computer Science? Computer Science is the study of computers and computational systems. Unlike electrical and computer engineers, computer scientists deal mostly with software and software systems; this includes their theory, design, development, and application. Principal areas of study within Computer Science include artificial intelligence, computer systems and networks, security, database systems, human computer interaction, vision and graphics, numerical analysis, programming languages, software engineering, bioinformatics and theory of computing. Although knowing how to program is essential to the study of computer science, it is only one element of the field. Computer scientists design and analyze algorithms to solve programs and study the performance of computer hardware and software. The problems that computer scientists encounter range from the abstract-- determining what problems can be solved with computers and the complexity of the algorithms that solve them – to the tangible – designing applications that perform well on handheld devices, that are easy to use, and that uphold security measures. Graduates of University of Maryland’s Computer Science Department are lifetime learners; they are able to adapt quickly with this challenging field. Contact Our Office CS Undergraduate OfficeBrendan Iribe Center for Computer Science and EngineeringUniversity of Maryland8125 Paint Branch DriveCollege Park, MD 20742 (301) 405-2672 Part of the Department of Computer ScienceBrendan Iribe Center for Computer Science and EngineeringUniversity of Maryland8125 Paint Branch DriveCollege Park, MD 20742 (301) 405-2662 Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn RSS Feed Web Accessibility | Privacy Notice | Login 