 What is Software Engineering? | Michigan Technological University Skip to page content Skip to footer navigation Menu Students Faculty/Staff Alumni Parents Industry Tech Links A to Z Banweb Campus Map Canvas Email MyMichiganTech Safety Data Sheets Website Settings Search Clear Search Input Search Category Michigan Tech This Site Programs Directory Go Open Search Undergraduate Computer Science BS Cybersecurity BS Data Science BS Software Engineering BS General Computing Program Computing Minors CS Department Courses Accreditation Advising Enterprise Transfer Students Student Organizations Graduate Applied Computer Science MS Computer Science MS, PhD Computational Science & Engineering PhD Cybersecurity MS Data Science MS Accelerated Master's Faculty Advisors CS Department Courses Graduate Awards Theses and Dissertations FAQs Admission Timeline Graduate Research Positions Find a Research Opportunity Research Active Projects Publications Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Architecture Education, Society, and Profession Programming Languages and Software Engineering Security and Privacy Systems and Networking Institute of Computing and Cybersystems Facilities Department About Annual Highlights Faculty Directory Department Staff External Advisory Board CS Events Alumni Student Awards Faculty Awards Employment Contact Us Giving Opportunities Apply Now Search Clear Search Input Search Category Michigan Tech This Site Programs Directory Search Undergraduate Computer Science BS Cybersecurity BS Data Science BS Software Engineering BS General Computing Program Computing Minors CS Department Courses Accreditation Advising Enterprise Transfer Students Student Organizations Graduate Applied Computer Science MS Computer Science MS, PhD Computational Science & Engineering PhD Cybersecurity MS Data Science MS Accelerated Master's Faculty Advisors CS Department Courses Graduate Awards Theses and Dissertations FAQs Admission Timeline Graduate Research Positions Find a Research Opportunity Research Active Projects Publications Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Architecture Education, Society, and Profession Programming Languages and Software Engineering Security and Privacy Systems and Networking Institute of Computing and Cybersystems Facilities Department About Annual Highlights Faculty Directory Department Staff External Advisory Board CS Events Alumni Student Awards Faculty Awards Employment Contact Us Giving Opportunities Apply Now Info For . . . Students Faculty/Staff Alumni Parents Industry Tech Links A to Z Banweb Campus Map Canvas Email MyMichiganTech Safety Data Sheets Website Settings Computer Science Michigan Tech Computing Computer Science Software Engineering BS What is Software Engineering? Software Engineers Software Engineers Software engineers apply engineering principles and knowledge of programming languages to design, develop, test, and maintain a range of software applications.✕ What is Software Engineering? Software engineering is the branch of computer science that deals with the design, development, testing, and maintenance of software applications. Software engineers apply engineering principles and knowledge of programming languages to build software solutions for end users. Software engineers design and develop computer games, business applications, operating systems, network control systems, and middleware—to name just a few of the many career paths available. A career as a software engineer can be both fun and challenging with opportunities to work in almost any industry, including large and small businesses, government agencies, nonprofit organizations, healthcare facilities, and more. And as technology continues to evolve, the need for software developers continues to grow. Many companies are also shifting towards hiring software engineers who work from home, allowing for increased flexibility and more opportunities to enter the field. What Careers Are There in Software Engineering? Career opportunities in software engineering are driven by new technologies in automobiles, aviation, data management, telecommunications, factory control, robotics, defense, and security. Software engineers may develop computer games, business applications, operating systems, network control systems, and more. A bachelor's degree or higher is often required to work as a software engineer. Two common jobs within software engineering are applications developers and systems developers. Applications developers design computer applications, such as games, for consumers. They may create custom software for a specific customer or commercial software to be sold to the general public. Some applications developers create databases or programs for use internally or online. Systems developers create operating systems, either for the public or for an organization. These operating systems keep computers functioning and control most of the consumer electronics in use today, including those in cell phones and cars. Often, systems developers also build the interface that allows users to interact with the computer. Of course, applications and systems developer jobs are not the only two positions available in the field of software engineering. Other common roles include mobile developers, applications architects, quality assurance analysts, and database administrators. Some common job titles for software engineers include: Applications Architect Applications Developer Computer Applications Engineer Database Administrator Mobile Developer Program Manager Programmer Project Leader Quality Assurance Analyst Software Engineer Software Quality Engineer Systems Analyst Systems Developer What Tasks do Software Engineers do? Successful software engineers use programming languages, platforms, and architectures to develop everything from computer games to network control systems. In addition to building their own systems, software engineers also test, improve, and maintain software built by other engineers. Day-to-day tasks for a software engineer might include: Designing and maintaining software systems or applications Evaluating and testing new software programs Optimizing software for speed and scalability Writing and testing code Ensuring platform compatibility Creating and enforcing IT standards within an infrastructure Maintaining documentation of IT systems Releasing software updates Collaborating with development teams, senior systems architects, and data science professionals Consulting with clients, engineers, security specialists, and other stakeholders Recommending software upgrades for existing programs and systems Presenting new features to stakeholders and internal customers How Much do Software Engineers Make? Thanks to strong industry demand and their own technical expertise, skilled software engineers are well compensated for the value they deliver. The mean annual salary for software developers was $132,930 in May 2022. The hiring outlook for software engineers is great, as well. The Bureau of Labor Statistics projects that software engineering jobs will increase 25 percent through 2031. Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics More about computing salaries. What Skills do Software Engineers Need? Software developers design software to help solve problems faced by real people. This requires a combination of both technical and soft skills. A bachelor's degree in computer science, software engineering, or a related degree program is the most common entry-level requirement for software engineers. Generally speaking, most software engineers will need to have the following technical knowledge and skills: Coding languages like Python, Java, C, C++, or Scala Object-oriented programming Database architecture Agile and Scrum project management Operating systems Cloud computing Version control Design testing and debugging Other beneficial soft skills for a software engineer may include: Collaboration and communication Multitasking Continuous learning Attention to detail Problem-solving Agile project management The Future of Software Engineering With our ever-increasing dependency on technology and the growing internet of things, the future of software engineering is bright. Software engineers are employable in nearly every industry, in both large and small organizations. According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, employment of software developers, quality assurance analysts, and testers is projected to grow 22 percent through 2030—much faster than the average for all occupations. Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics Software Engineering at Michigan Tech Michigan Technological University's College of Computing is the first college in Michigan fully dedicated to computing, and one of only a few nationwide. Secure your future in software engineering with a degree from Michigan's flagship technological university. Software Engineering—BS Michigan Tech's ABET-accredited Bachelor of Science in Software Engineering is consistently ranked among the top ten undergraduate software engineering programs in the country. Our curriculum provides a foundation in computer science during the first two years followed by specialized training for software engineers during the final two years focusing on both the practical and technical sides of software. Opportunities to explore software engineering outside the classroom are numerous at Michigan Tech. You might choose to join a computing-focused Enterprise team or student organization, seek out research opportunities with faculty members, or develop an independent project. With an entire College dedicated to computing, you're sure to find your people and form lasting connections while exploring your passion for computing. When you graduate from Tech, you'll be in demand by employers. 100 percent of our software engineering graduates are employed within six months of graduation. Their employers include major companies such as American Express, Argonne National Laboratory, Boeing, Blue Cross Blue Shield, General Electric, Google, Lockheed Martin, Motorola, Texas Instruments, the US Air Force, and more. General Computing Program If you're still deciding which computer science focus you want to pursue, the first-year undergraduate General Computing program gives you one or two semesters to explore the discipline and decide which degree program sparks your curiosity the most. It's a starting point to give you some space to choose the computing field that fits you the best. Request Info Apply to Michigan Tech Fast Facts Software Developer Salaries1 Mean Annual Salary: $132,930 Top 10 Percent Salary: $198,100 1: US Bureau of Labor Statistics OEWS Software Developer Rankings2 #1 in Best Technology Jobs #1 in 100 Best Jobs #1 in Best STEM Jobs #23 in Best Paying Jobs Software Developer Job Satisfaction3 Upward Mobility: High Stress Level: Average Flexibility: Above Average 2, 3: Best Jobs U.S. News Rankings More about computing salaries. More About Computing Computing Salaries What is Computer Network and System Administration? What is Computer Science? What is Cybersecurity? What is Data Science? What is Electrical Engineering Technology? What is Health Informatics? What is Mechatronics? What is Software Engineering? Request Undergraduate Information Apply Now Request Information Schedule a Visit Give Apply Admissions Undergraduate Admissions Graduate Admissions Global Campus Request Information Schedule a Visit Apply Virtual Tours Study and Live Degrees / Majors Colleges and Departments Library Events Calendar Arts and Entertainment Fitness and Recreation Campus and Beyond Campus Info About Michigan Tech Accreditation Athletics Campus Map Campus Directory Jobs at Michigan Tech Webcams Policies and Safety Campus Safety Information Emergency Contact Information Report a Concern Public Safety / Police Services Student Disclosures Title IX University Policies Computer ScienceRekhi Hall1400 Townsend DriveHoughton, MI 49931 906-487-2209906-487-2283csdept@mtu.eduContact UsFacebookTwitterLinkedinInstagramYoutube Accessibility Equal Opportunity Email the Webmaster Tomorrow Needs Michigan Tech © 2023 Michigan Technological University © 